Section A

Introduction to Computers and programming

Computers are general purpose, programmable devices that are capable of calculating and storing results.
They can be used for typing, desktop publishing, sound editing, video editing, accounts, email, internet browsing and
technical drawing – just to name a few. They are used in businesses, government, education, entertainment, health care, 
sport, art and design, homes, clubs, restaurants, libraries, car engines, bank automatic teller machines, supermarket checkouts,
washing machines, telephone systems, video recorders and watches. All computer information is stored in digital format. This format
is binary code which consists only of 0s and 1s – on and off. Everything input into the computer is converted into binary code and 
likewise, in order to output the information into its original state, the binary code must converted back again.

Programming is basically giving a computer a set of instructions to execute or perform.Computers have their own specific language different 
from that humans use.Computer instructions are interpreted as 0/1.So for humans to tell computers what to do they have to write certain 
languages.These languages are called programming languages examples of programming languages included python,php,java script,c,html,css etc
But for us to understand programming languages we have to understand how the computers works.So lets jump straight into it.

A computer is splited into two sections the hardware and the software.The hardware is the physical part we can see with our own eyes that 
part we can actually touch.The software is the part of a computer that we can not see with our eyes but we that see what it is doing
The software is formed pr is made using the programming languages the i hav ementioned above.

Hardware

Hardware consists of the physical components of a computer system, which include peripheral equipment – equipment outside of the
tower case – such as printers, modems, scanners, monitors, keyboards and mouse devices. The 3 essential peripherals include the
monitor (output), keyboard and mouse (input). Hardware is broken up into four categories: input, output, storage and processing.

Software

There are 2 types of software: The Operating System (OS), and Application Software. The OS on these machines is Microsoft Windows.
We will look at Windows later in the notes. Application Software consists of programs or sets of instructions that cause the computer 
system to behave in a given way. E.g. Microsoft Word - Word Processing Software; Microsoft Excel - Spreadsheet Software;
Microsoft PowerPoint - Presentation Software; Internet Explorer - Internet Browsing Software. These you will find by clicking on the
Start button with your mouse and then clicking on Programs.

i think you are now familiar with the basic stuff about computers.You can go on and do more research about who create a computer and why
they created it.Right now we are going to actually interact with our computers that are sitting infront of you.i hope you are excited as
i am.Computers are very fun to use because you can do a lot of staff with them(don't worry you will all soon be familiar with what they do)

We will start by naming all the hardware component of the computer and highlight how they work.This is the Central Processing Unit 
known as the CPU,it is the brain of the computer,it perform all major functions of the computer.The second component we are going to
is the monitor, the monitor works as the interaction point between the computer and the user.Another important component of the computer
is the keyboard;it allows us to put inputs into the computer.We are going to learn a bit more about the Keyboard.

Keyboard

Caps Lock Key 
The caps lock key activates a feature that affects only the letter keys. Pressing on the caps lock button causes all letter 
keys to type in uppercase. All other keys will act the same as if caps lock is off. To deactivate caps lock, press the caps lock
key again. 

Shift Key 
The shift key is used in combination with a second key. The shift key is used primarily to capitalize letters.
Shift differs from caps lock because you have to hold the shift key down while simultaneously pressing another key to 
capitalize a letter, where you only press the caps lock key once. Holding down the shift key also is used to type the characters
and symbols above the numbers on the number keys. 

Tab Key
The tab key is used to move from one position on the screen to another. It also creates a “tab stop” (right 1/2 inch)
indentation for your paragraphs. This is very similar to a typewriter. 
 
Enter Key
When working with text (words), pressing on the enter key moves the cursor down to the next line. Otherwise,
pressing the enter key will activate anything that you have selected. 
 
Escape Key 
The escape key is used to cancel the current operation or can be used to exit a program.

Spacebar
Pressing the space bar while the cursor is positioned within text will cause a space (one character wide) to be placed
at the position of the cursor.

Control Key 
The control key (Ctrl) is usually used with another key. Holding the control key in addition to another key or keys will
start a function. Later on, we will teach you some control key functions that deal with word processing. 

Alt Key 
The alternate key (Alt), similar to the control key, and is used in combination with other keys.

Arrow Keys
The four arrow keys are located on several keys to the right of the spacebar at the bottom of the keyboard.
Pressing one of these keys will cause some type of screen movement in the direction of the arrow on the key.
These keys are frequently used when correcting mistakes in documents and allow users to “go back” and fix mistakes
instead of erasing all of the work since the mistake was made. 

Backspace Key 
Pressing the backspace key while the cursor is positioned within text will delete the character (or space) immediately to 
the left of the cursor. 

Delete Key
Pressing the delete key while the cursor is positioned within text will delete the character (or space) immediately to the right
of the cursor.

The mouse
Another component of the computer is the mouse the mouse allows us to move the mouse from point A to B.It also allows us to select 
thing buy clicking on the item.Clicking just means presssing the button on the mouse.Lets look into detail of how a mouse works.

Using a mouse

1.	Let your hand rest comfortably on top of the mouse. Most people are righthanded and therefore, the mouse is usually on the
right side of the computer. All left-handed folks don’t have to worry because millions of “lefties” use computers. Some lefthanded
people simply move the mouse over to their left side of the computer and use it there. Others use their right hand and soon become 
ambidextrous! It’s most important to remember to “do what’s most comfortable for you!” For teaching purposes, we will now continue using
the right hand terminology.



 




